Document plugin packaging (#2100)
jupyter-book/mystmd: docs/plugins-distribute.md

:::

:::{note} Example: Share a simple plugin without a build tool
If your plugin is simple enough, you can directly share it as an ESM bundle rather than needing a builder like `esbuild`. [Here is a an example of a simple plugin](https://github.com/myst-ext/myst-ext-lorem) that generates Lorem Ipsum text. It does not require a separate build tool.
:::

### Other JavaScript bundlers

There are a few other bundlers in the JavaScript ecosystem, which you may use to package MyST plugins if you prefer. We share them in case you don't want to use `esbuild` for some reason (but for most people, `esbuild` should be just fine).

* [tsup](https://github.com/egoist/tsup) - [example plugin](https://github.com/myst-ext/myst-ext-discourse)
* [ncc](https://github.com/vercel/ncc) - [example plugin](https://github.com/myst-ext/myst-ext-xref-prefix/blob/e975496cafa57e86c88ea71d3abe26a7174b3944/package.json#L20) 

> 

Author: ```suggestion

## Distribute your plugin via a URL

The easiest way to distribute your plugin is via an accessible URL that points to the bundled file that you've created.
Then you can [configure `myst.yml` to use the URL in your plugin](#plugins:use).

For example, you can [use GitHub releases](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/releasing-projects-on-github/about-releases) to publish your built plugin as an artifact attached to a release. This will create a persistent URL that you can point to in your `myst.yml` build.
```

---
title: Package and distribute plugins
description: Share your custom plugins so that others can use them.
---

> There is no "official" way to distribute plugins with MyST. However, you can use common workflows in the JavaScript ecosystem to distribute your plugins so that others can use them. This page documents a few approaches that may work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is no "official" way to distribute plugins with MyST. However, you can use common workflows in the JavaScript ecosystem to distribute your plugins so that others can use them. This page documents a few of those.
```

Not sure if you want to be so hesitant about your recommendations :)

> There is no "official" way to distribute plugins with MyST. However, you can use common workflows in the JavaScript ecosystem to distribute your plugins so that others can use them. This page documents a few approaches that may work.

Reviewer: this sounds like you are talking about distributing plugins *with* myst. Maybe "distribute MyST plugins"?

> 
> ## Package plugins into a single ESM file 
> 
> JavaScript uses the [ECMAScript Modules standard](https://nodejs.org/api/esm.html) for packaging and distributing scripts. Your plugins can be bundled and distributed in the same way.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
## Plugins with no dependencies can be distributed as a single `.mjs` file

If your plugin doesn't require any extra dependencies, then you can distributed it as a single `.mjs` file written in JavaScript. You can then use it locally or [distribute it via a URL](#plugin:distribute-url).

See [](./javascript-plugins.md) for several example plugins written as individual `.mjs` files with no dependencies.
## Package plugins into a single ESM file 

JavaScript uses the [ECMAScript Modules standard](https://nodejs.org/api/esm.html) for packaging and distributing scripts. Your plugins can be bundled and distributed in the same way.

```

## Use a builder to build an ESM package

There are several "builders" in the JavaScript ecosystem that make it easy to quickly bundle JavaScript in distributable packages. The resulting artifact can then be shared directly, or published to a package registry like [NPM](https://npmjs.com).

> We recommend [using `esbuild`](https://esbuild.github.io/) to accomplish this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend [`esbuild`](https://esbuild.github.io/).
```

Our docs have a lot of words to read through, so as a general principle I'd embrace conciseness.

:::

:::{note} Example: Share a simple plugin without a build tool
If your plugin is simple enough, you can directly share it as an ESM bundle rather than needing a builder like `esbuild`. [Here is a an example of a simple plugin](https://github.com/myst-ext/myst-ext-lorem) that generates Lorem Ipsum text. It does not require a separate build tool.
:::

### Other JavaScript bundlers

There are a few other bundlers in the JavaScript ecosystem, which you may use to package MyST plugins if you prefer. We share them in case you don't want to use `esbuild` for some reason (but for most people, `esbuild` should be just fine).

* [tsup](https://github.com/egoist/tsup) - [example plugin](https://github.com/myst-ext/myst-ext-discourse)
* [ncc](https://github.com/vercel/ncc) - [example plugin](https://github.com/myst-ext/myst-ext-xref-prefix/blob/e975496cafa57e86c88ea71d3abe26a7174b3944/package.json#L20) 

> ## Distribute your plugin via a URL

Author: ```suggestion
(plugin:distribute-url)=
## Distribute your plugin via a URL
```
